# Biota

In this repository you find the code for the automatic identification of succesional states in the Colombian tropical dry forest. 

Ecosystem monitoring based on direct observations is time-consuming, invasive, and expensive. New alternatives based on technological tools are needed to complement field campaigns or to conduct extensive monitoring. In a transformed forest ecosystem, understanding changes in composition and structure of biological communities requires investigating the interaction between landscape transformation and natural processes like succession; it should be considered in monitoring schemes. Ecoacustic information could ease the investigation of the interplay between forest transformation and natural processes because it provides information on community composition, structure, and patterns of multiple taxa (birds, insects, amphibia, mammals) providing an integral approach to ecosystem characterization. The Colombian Tropical dry forest (TDF) is characterized by high levels of endemism but it is also the most threatened, which makes it necessary to understand and monitor its current status given high levels and landscape transformation.  We propose a methodology uses ecoacoustic information to explore and classify successional states of TDF remnants. Using recordings from TDF at different levels of landscape transformation and successional states, we first filtered out the rain and noisy recordings, to estimate the acoustic indices, with which we designed a classification algorithm based on Hidden Markov Models with Gaussian Mixtures Emissions (GMMHMM). We used recordings from the basins of Rio Cañas (Guajira), Rio Garupal (Cesar), and Rio Arroyo Grande (Bolivar) on the Colombian Caribbean region. Results have an average accuracy of 81 % in test performance using 4-fold cross-validation. The proposed model shows an important performance in the successional states classification and it permit find intermediate states. That show that the method can be used as a guide to the revision of the labeled successional states in TDF.
